[Music]
[Applause]
okay great
who at light is pretty intense well
thank you very much Angela for the
introduction I like to thank the
organizers and the sponsors for what
appears to be a very exciting and
informative conference what I'd like to
do this afternoon is present you with a
strategy a strategy that we think will
eventually be the primary way to manage
cancer and I'd like to give background
information first on where this concept
of press pulse originally came from and
then I'd like to briefly go over what we
view as the cancer code and I'll explain
that and then how we apply the press
pulse strategy to a particular type of
cancer called glioblastoma and then I'm
going to show an overview of how the
strategy can be applied for almost every
cancer let's see all right where did
this idea of press pulse come from all
right this is actually derived from the
field of paleo biology it was considered
a mechanism responsible for the mass
extinction of organisms during prior
evolutionary epochs
so press disturbances produced a chronic
stress on populations while the pulse
disturbin produced an acute stress on
populations but it was only when both of
these stresses coincided was their mass
extinction of organisms so you can see
the connection we take this concept and
now we apply it to the cancer problem
because the goal is to resolve the
disease all right we want to exterminate
cancer cells but we want to do it in
such a way that we don't harm the body
or the organ that we're working with so
before we can understand how to apply a
press call therapeutic strategy for the
management of cancer we have to
understand what
this disease is and I put this up here
is the cancer code alright I put it up
there because in my neck of the woods in
Boston Dana Farber comes on the radio
and the TV telling me or us that they
have the cancer code which is based on
the gene theory of cancer alright and we
know from a lot of work the gene theory
is now under attack and as Travis
Kristofferson would say it's becoming a
dead fury so what is cancer
it's a mitochondrial metabolic disease
where fermentation gradually replaces
respiration for cellular energy this is
Warburg's central theory glucose and
glutamine are the major fermentable
fuels for driving cancer growth alright
the cancer cell can ferment other things
in the micro environment the issue is
there's not enough of those other things
to drive the beast ketone bodies can
replace glucose and normal cells but not
in tumor cells this is because the tumor
cell has defective oxidative
phosphorylation tumor cells are abnormal
the mitochondria and tumor cells are
abnormal ketones cannot be fermented
keep ketones must be respired reactive
oxygen production is greater in tumor
cells than in normal cells the why that
is is because why the Ross don't kill
the tumor cells we've seen that we've
had this debate the other day about the
RUS the reactive oxygen species these
cells are making more of us but they're
not dying they're not dying because
they're fermenting glucose and glutamine
which produces tremendous antioxidant
capacity in these cells so even though
they're making more Ross they're
actually protecting themselves by
fermenting these particular fuels cancer
mutations arise as an effect and are not
the cause of destabilized energy
metabolism this is very important
because the somatic mutation theory is
chasing all these gene mutations right
these are effects they're not the cause
they're red herrings feel this wasting
massive amount of time chasing those
things
it's the metabolism that's causing those
things that's a randomness cancer
mutations make tumour cells more
vulnerable to energy stress than normal
cells how do you think it here's a cell
full of mutation broken chromosomes you
think that cell is going to be tough
when put under energy
dress every cell in our body earned the
right to be here
are we have an evolutionary history of
survival extreme stress in the
environment and then all of a sudden
we're claiming that these cells with all
kinds of broken promise ohms and
mutations are going to be more fit than
the cells that we have that evolved
wrong those cells are weak and we just
have to know how to exploit their
weaknesses glutamine addicted neoplastic
macrophage Fusion Hybrid is the origin
of the metastatic cancer cell these
cells naturally have the capacity to
enter in exit tissues live in the
bloodstream suppress the immune system
all right this is the cell that we're
dealing with these cells evolved to live
in hypoxic environments they're tough
cells to kill the press pulse
therapeutic strategy is going to
possibly manage and and possibly resolve
the disease as I'll explain to you and
we're going to I'm going to demonstrate
this with glioblastoma multiforme II
among the most aggressive of all primary
tumors poor prognosis we know this no
effective therapies composed of multiple
cell types consequently the term multi
for me because there's different forms
of the cells there are stem cells and
neoplastic mizenko microglia in this
commission of cells the stem cells will
grow like crazy but they are not the
cells that invade throughout the brain
they cause mass displacement of tissue
it's the neoplastic ms entacle of
microglia that are invade through the
brain and they invade using the
secondary structures of Scherrer which
were described many years ago by
Professor Shira their anatomical regions
in the brain and the tumor cells will
use these anatomical regions to spread
throughout the brain consequently
becomes almost impossible to cure KBM
with surgery alone and the other
characteristic of this tumor is they
metastasize when GBM cells escaped from
the brain and get into the body they
spread like crazy powerful metastatic
disease unfortunately it doesn't happen
very often but when it does it's
devastated now this is a cross-section
through the brain of a person who died
from GBM and you can see the large in
the chronic area cystic area you can
also see the compression of the of the
ventricle most of the patients who die
from this disease die from intracranial
pressure so and
the issue the normal-appearing brain
area if I can get that here okay they're
laced with tumor so you just can't see
them they're not that obvious but they
get to the other side of the brain they
go they use blood vessels all right they
use these blood vessels as railroad
tracks and other anatomical regions to
spread throughout the brain that's why
you can't cure these things with surgery
because these tumor cells are already
spread throughout the brain and they use
blood vessels as one of the means to do
this they go across the vehicle robbing
space on the like like like railroad
tracks and immunotherapies can't get to
these guys they're on the opposite side
of the brain that's why that's not gonna
work now the other thing is the
mitochondria damaged in GBM all right
look at the mite this is a normal
mitochondria stripes those stripes are
cristae they contain the proteins and
the lipids that are responsible for
electron transport the oxidative
phosphorylation capacity of the south
this is a mitochondrion of a GBM a large
matrix small amount of Chris take
crystallises structure dictates function
if the very structures needed for
oxidative phosphorylation are damaged or
missing the cell can't get energy from
oxidative phosphorylation it's just that
simple so how is this cell going to
survive it has to ferment what does it
ferment glucose and glutamine now this
is another work from Ruth Dayton's group
where she looked at the did a big
proteomic analysis in GBM and they were
looking at normal mitochondria and
abnormal so if you look at normal
mitochondria most of the normal
mitochondria are found in normal brain
brain sections and and are and not in
the GBM have very low normal
mitochondria just the opposite abnormal
mitochondria are enriched in the GBM and
very very few in normal brain regions
and you can see see these dense cristae
those are normal-looking mitochondria
here's in the GBM you see and you see
all the Cris take these cells can't
respire how people say these cells can
respond makes no sense to me and the
anatomical structures are here what
people have to do is look at the data
now what's driving this disease what's
driving the beast
it's glucose and glutamine they're
fermenting so glucose comes in through
the glucose transporters and a Christos
just gave us some instruction on this
glucose 6-phosphate Emden Meyerhoff
Parnes pathway to produce lactic acid
now you there's some debate yeah might
not be as much energy coming from the
substrate level phosphorylation and
glycolysis but that's probably some in
some tumors maybe more in others lactic
acid is dumped out causes acidification
of the microenvironment contribute
contributing to wound healing and all
the angiogenic factors that you see also
glucose six can go down the pentose
phosphate pathway producing ribose
5-phosphate a precursor for a nucleotide
synthesis it also produces NADPH a
substrate for glutathione and as I said
the glutathione antioxidant system it's
one of them may not oxidize antioxidant
systems so we're keeping our antioxidant
levels high at the same time the
glutamine is coming into these cells and
split through the glutamine ace to
glutamate and ammonia the ammonia from
the amide nitrogen is used as a
precursor for nucleotide synthesis so
some of the glutamate is pumped back out
into the micro environment that we know
that glutamate and the micro environment
allows these cells to become even more
aggressive because the cells are going
to be excited toxic death is going to
contribute from all this glutamate
glutamate dumping and as we just heard
from Christos the glutamate can drive
substrate level phosphorylation in the
TCA cycle to very high levels so these
cells are getting their energy their
metabolites and also the glutamate is
part of the glutathione complex so
glutamine and glucose are building a
very powerful antioxidant building all
the metabolites that you need to grow
the Beast all right how many therapies
are we using to stop this how many of
the drug therapies the immunotherapies
all the things that we're using to stop
this are we doing this
I don't know of any better do that are
combining both together simultaneously
now what do we do for the standard of
care all right so we take somebody
diagnosed with a GBM before they even
have the opportunity to really
understand what's going on we do
surgical about the bulky
so we take the surgery out it's like
hitting a beat but beehive in the middle
of the day the bees come flying out all
right so you create a wound and that
wound is now going to initiate these
tumor cells to start spreading as soon
as the patient has the opportunity we
start a rating radiating that person
with high-dose radiation creating
necrotic environment breaking apart the
glutamine glutamate cycle freedom
glutamine that goes into the tumor cells
to drive their fermentation metabolism
okay we create a necrotic environment
excited toxic death the head begins to
swell we have edema how do we stop edema
we throw in massive doses of steroids
dexamethasone which elevates blood sugar
blood sugar the other component for
driving the beast
so the standard of care is creating
environment to make sure that tumor or
to facilitate that tumors recurrence
alright so and these things are many of
them are affected with human
cytomegalovirus which is a supercharger
for drive and glucose and glutamine into
those tumor cells the worst condition
when adrienne said the other day GBM is
a perfect storm the perfect storm is
created by the standard of care and look
at the results here we're radiating
these poor people nobody survived zero
survivors this is from one of the
snooper protocols and that we use
radiation Tim as Olamide we get we get a
few extra survivors but if you look at
it five six is added five hundred at one
point one percent of the people treated
what do you expect from a therapy that's
creating the perfect environment for the
fermentation of these cells you would
not expect anything different from this
make matters worse you throw in this
toxic alkylating agent Tim as Olamide
which increases driver mutation it makes
no sense at all because these people
have a little bit of an entry increase
in progression-free survival from a drug
that increases driver mutations what
does that mean nonsense this whole thing
about the gene theory is just such
nonsense
now I put this I put this up here this
is remembering Brittany Maynard tragic
tragic situation you may have read about
her in People magazine
all these kinds of things I mean here
she was right after she got married she
she she was operated for by a low grade
low grade and within it was in a few
weeks that turned into a high grade
tumor
all right GBM unbelievable so she says
she's taken the standard of care she's I
don't want to go through this so you can
see look at her here that's moon face
that's from high-dose steroids that
she's receiving that's the result of
that she said I don't want to go through
this anymore right so she goes to she's
lifting and California goes to Oregon
right to die so she dies with dignity on
November 1st within less than a year
right so so the question is in this
article so all the morality of right to
die discussions nothing about the
failure of the standard of care if the
standard of care weren't so bad maybe
she wouldn't have to couldn't have to do
this now here's Pablo Kelly made know an
alternative choice all right recent
paper this came out at last summer July
15 2016 in the English paper Herald
Express diagnosed with GBM he's
approximately the same age that Brittany
diagnosed with GBM in August 2014 he
decides no radiation no chemo nothing no
standard of care just ketogenic diet and
supplements and I emailed him just a
week ago and he's doing fine I mean he's
he's he's working through the system but
this summer he'll be out three years he
didn't have to go to Oregon you know the
issue here there are choices people can
make choices when they have the
information needed to make the correct
choice now if we're going to develop
therapies that work and therapies that
can resolve and manage this disease you
we need good preclinical mouse models or
animal models for the disease and we've
built one of the best models that there
is that replicates all of the major
characteristics that you see in human
glioblastoma
that's the vm3 model and Christos just
mentioned that a moment ago it
replicates all of the major growth
characteristics of the human brain
including extra neural metastases it's a
spontaneous to murrs arise spontaneously
in the mouse that is sinchon egg in
munich is a normal immune system and the
genetic background of the tumor and the
host is the same and it even has neural
x
neural metastases if you have a good
model of glioblastoma animal model grow
it take it and grow it outside and if it
spreads throughout the mouse that's the
model that you want if it grows us a big
ball
that's a stem-cell tumor you can kill
those easy the spreading ones are much
more difficult I also want to mention
Pablo is not alone there are many more
people now going down Pablo through
Andrew Scarborough is here
he's another individual and I spoke to
Andrew and Andrew Stelling me more and
more people to choosing the Pablo path
now the other thing here is that we how
these tumor cells rip through the
mouse's brain is the same as they
ripping through the human brain
they grow across the surface they grow
across myelinated fiber tracts interface
SiC Euler through the ventricles look at
this beautiful tumor cells around the
blood vessel just like I showed you with
the human GBM they're using these blood
vessels as railroad tracks to get
through the brain among some of these
other structures that's why it's so hard
to kill these tumors now of course I got
into this Jeep this ketogenic diet a
while ago calorie restriction ketogenic
diet it was working really well and a
lot of tumors it wasn't working on this
to this extent that we would thought it
would work look this is an ounce that
eats all he wants you put the tumor
cells in the brain and they rip they
invade right through you can see these
chunks of - well in advance of the major
tumor right here you put it into this
brain and this guy we calorie restricted
and we use calorie restricted ketogenic
diets to deoxy glucose calorie
restriction and my students were saying
to me it's not going down like the other
tumors what's wrong with this tumor how
come this tumor it refuses to be beaten
down by calorie restricted ketogenic
diets we damn near starve this mouse to
death to see if we could couldn't stop
the tumor now what it did do is it's it
significantly reduced invasion so the
invasive properties of the tumor were
markedly reduced but we weren't killing
the majority of the tumor cells why are
these guys surviving when we're throwing
the kitchen sink at them and we threw
Tim as Olamide at this guy - we couldn't
stop it
do you think it could be the glutamine
so we chose this to test the hypothesis
we used on six days oh five
so neural leucine it's a glutamine
analog it comes in it blocks the
glutamine ace activity you can't take it
up it just gums up the whole glutamine
system it reduces TCA cycle
substrate-level phosphorylation which we
just heard from dr. Christoffel is and
it also halts DNA and RNA synthesis what
happens when we treat these tumors now
with the ketogenic diet and this
glutamine inhibitor alright so this is
our strategy that's the way we do things
in in our lab we don't put cells in the
brain we put a fragment of the cover of
a tumor from another Mouse into the
brain so that tumor already has a micro
environment ready to go it's a stage for
GBM as soon as we put it into the brain
or who don't use cells that are that you
start treating with cells you get good
results you tried putting a chunk in
there when it's already got a micro
environment you see what happens we let
it go for three days now it's a stage
for it here and then we've put them on a
fast fast them all the mice all tonight
and then we're we give them back either
high card diet or ketogenic diet
restricted and then we wait a few more
days to let this thing you know really
settle in and then we use pulsing with
Don every other day either 0.5 or 1.5
Meg and then we terminate we use in vivo
bioluminescence imaging ex vivo imaging
take the brain out of the mouse put it
in the dish and bioluminescent because
living the bioluminescence will pick up
the living cells well we said wow how
come these guys are only with it why
don't we stop at 15 because the guy's
chomping down on the hard carbs are
dying they're starting to get more but
at 14 15 days of age and so fast will
you already put a stage 4 brain tumor in
these mice alright you have to realize
this so now we're going to look at the
data this is under unpublished
observations that I thought I'd the need
to share with you all right so we use
bioluminescence imaging and here's the
guys eating the high carbohydrate
standard diet with no treatment so there
the control for for the for the study
and then using the dawn by itself we got
a 44% reduction of the growth of the
tumor the light so we absence of light
means you're killing the tumor cells and
I'll show you the evidence the diet by
itself had some minor effect that stops
invasion but as you
see we're not slaughtering these tumor
cells with that with the diet alone we
put the diet and the drug and we got a
powerful synergy between the diet and
the drug and some of these mice had no
light so we went back and repeated the
experiment only this time using a higher
concentration of Don just a little bit
higher and using the the ketogenic diet
restricted now as our control this is
the group that usually mostly represents
your experimental and other studies
we're using this as the control compared
with the with the diet and the drug so
we're pressing with we're pressing the
system with the diet and we're pulsing
the system with the done and what we
found is that this is background light
almost no light only one guy had the
significant amount of light in this in
the in the in the treated group and it
turned out this was the one mouse that
was looking a little finicky and we said
let's pull it let's not inject him today
so we didn't inject him he was the only
guy that had a little bit of light left
is with one missing one one one
injection so we do the Annette average
of this having a massive unbelievable
amount of death and reduction when we
targeted both the glucose that with the
ketones and and the dawn as a pulse and
this is what it looks like when you put
it in the in the petri dish so we take
the brain out of the mouse you can see
it here and that we do the
bioluminescence imaging standard high
carb diets ripping okay they they
they're out of the program in 14 15 days
the ketogenic diet guys yeah you have a
lot of light I told you the ketogenic
diet alone is not going to resolve these
GBM at least this one and the fact that
humans do so much better than the mice
is blowing my mind
you know I it's humans do much better
than the mice and then if you put the
two together the the restricted diet
without you know Kate we got no light
what does they have no light does that
mean there's no GBM that means this
resolved so we decide let's do the
histology on this thing and see what's
going on inside the brains of these guys
so H&E staining a pathological necessity
if you're going to prove anything in
neuropathology you have to do H&E
staining so what you have here is you
have standard diet unrestricted look at
the mass of the tumor and you can see
the tumor cells migrating your invading
I should say into this white this is the
invasion and that's not the low power
under high power these cells are so
healthy these cells are
they're packed their pilot on top of
each other massive cell density mitotic
figures this is like what you see in
human GBM now look at here's the calor
the ketogenic diet restricted there's a
sharper demarcation again the invasion
is slowed down and there's more spacing
between the cells but the cells are not
dying now there's some that are but
basically they're alive so then we put
the diet and the dawn together and we
got massive death as my associate Poorna
Mukherjee said you've got a battle field
here this is slaughter at the highest
level these are not live cells these are
fragments of cells all right and this is
consistent with the fact that there's no
light I don't know if we cured this
mouse we didn't do the full studies I
don't know if we resolved this mouse
completely all I know is there's no
light and we got massive death and if
you know them here's another very
important and very interesting
observation from this study it turns out
that when you give the dawn here's the
amount you get into the tumor in the
brain on this on the high carb diet but
with ketogenic diet we got almost twice
as much done drug on target is the
ketogenic diet is we saw this a long
time ago for another drug all right it
was a drug that we were using for
treating gangliosides storage disease
and when we gave it under a ketogenic
diet we delivered three times more drug
to the brain so I'm not really sure
what's going on here mechanistically but
it's very interesting and then this is
the work from Angela and Dominic and as
I said if you have a good model of
glioblastoma and you put it in the flank
it should spread throughout the mouse
and that's exactly what we're seeing
here labeled tumor cells implanted
subcutaneously and they were using now
hyperbaric oxygen as as the pulse and
the diet as the press and the oxygen you
know how little effect the diet of
course has has a little bit more effect
but it's new you're not resolving and
when you put the two together you get
synergy press pulse now this is the we
have this figure Dominic and I we have a
paper that we've submitted for it's
under review but we built this figure as
an example of the strategy that we plan
to use to manage and hopefully resolve
cancer what I did was used
vitruvian man symbol what we did so we
have an individual who's who has
metastatic cancer and we're going to try
to manage the metastatic cancer and then
we're going to try to resolve the
metastatic cancer whether that's colon
whether it's breast whether it's brain
bladder whatever this the strategy will
work because all the tumor cells are the
same disease cancer is a singular
disease of energy metabolism thriving on
fermentation fuels so the way to manage
the disease you have to press the and
you have to pulse press therapies can
involve but not exclusively restricted
ketogenic diets and sometimes you don't
need to restrict the diet and you can
have various dot various combinations of
the diet Paleo ketogenic diets some
people respond better to one type and
another fat composition of the diet
plays an important role so you need to
know that ketone supplements can be very
important as a continual press on the
system stress management is extremely
important if we're going to resolve
cancer people get emotionally freaked
out when they have cancer believe me
they get depression they get all kinds
of things if you're not able to deal
with their emotional stress it's not
going to resolve as quickly as it could
and we use what is this will use
exercise therapy yoga therapy if
necessary music therapy there's a
variety of different therapies that
actually can reduce physiological stress
and that's that we keep on the patients
so they feel good all the time you want
to keep their spirits up you want to
keep them involved in the management of
their disease and then while this is
going on we then Institute press their
pulse therapies which is glucose
inhibition we can take part of that is
coming from the diet but we can boost
that up a little bit when we use glucose
inhibitors to deoxy glucose Florida
there's a whole range of drugs that
could be applied here then we have
glutamine inhibitors I just gave you an
example of gone okay because we were
just trying to test hypothesis just to
test the hypothesis
so we there might be other blue to mean
inhibitors that could work as well and
then we have hyperbaric oxygen so we
have these are all press or pulse
therapies now the strategy is called
dosing timing and scheduling how much
doses do we use what is the dosage when
and for how long do we do this
what is the schedule all right which
comes first this one that one how do we
schedule this and in the intermediate
periods we can add back certain
therapies there inhale enhance the
health and vitality of the person so
what we're going to do is use this this
is a new novel therapeutic strategy for
the for the metabolic management of
cancer and it is my opinion that this
end time will eventually make most other
standard therapies for cancer obsolete
because this is based on the biology of
the system on the biochemistry of the
system and not some genetic nonsense of
the system okay I'd like to thank the
collaborators that have been working
with me on this and I especially like to
thank a single cause single cure
foundation that Travis Kristofferson has
set up it's a beacon he's one of the few
guys that really understands the nature
of the problem and people like Ed Miller
who support this is very important
George Yeo foundation these people's
symptoms seem to understand the nature
of the problem I don't know why these
few people understand it should be a lot
more other people understanding what the
problem is it's almost like there's some
sort of a wall to prevent people from
understanding what I just told you and
of course my own research and thank you
for your attention
[Applause]